Jupyter Agent 2 (#3037)
huggingface/blog: jupyter-agent-2.md

---
title: "😎 Creating a Data Science Agent from Scratch"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/jupyter-agent-2/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: baptistecolle
- user: hannayukhymenko
- user: lvwerra
---

> # Creating a Data Science Agent from Scratch

Reviewer: maybe this is a bit more consistent?

```suggestion
# Building a Jupyter Agent from Scratch
```

---
title: "😎 Creating a Data Science Agent from Scratch"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/jupyter-agent-2/thumbnail.png
authors:

> - user: baptistecolle

Author: Let me know the order you guys prefer

- user: hannayukhymenko
- user: lvwerra
---

# 😎 Creating a Data Science Agent from Scratch

Check out our new demo here: [huggingface.co/spaces/lvwerra/jupyter-agent-2](https://huggingface.co/spaces/lvwerra/jupyter-agent-2).  
This is a follow-up to our earlier work on [jupyter-agent (v1)](https://huggingface.co/spaces/lvwerra/jupyter-agent).

The **Jupyter Agent** is a data science agent that can execute code directly inside a Jupyter notebook. Think of it like *Cursor*, but living natively inside your data science workflow.  

> For this demo we use **QwenCoder**, currently one of the strongest coding models.

Reviewer 2: What's the relationship with the Qwen 4B model that is discussed in the rest of the post?

**Datasets:**  
- **Kaggle Notebooks dataset**: ~2TB of notebooks.  
- Rich metadata for each notebook (authors, datasets used, etc.).  

---

## ⚙️ Processing Pipeline

We designed a multi-stage pipeline using [Datatrove](https://github.com/huggingface/datatrove) to clean and prepare Kaggle notebooks at scale.  
Here’s how each step worked:

### 1. Large-scale deduplication
We started with ~2TB of Kaggle notebooks and reduced it to ~250GB reusing our work from the BigScience project.  
Most Kaggle notebooks are small variations or near-identical copies, so this step was essential.  
*Key insight:* ~90% of raw notebooks are duplicates, which would have skewed training if left unfiltered.

### 2. Downloading linked datasets
Notebooks usually reference external datasets through Kaggle metadata.  
We built a pipeline to automatically fetch these datasets, ensuring the code inside notebooks could actually run. The goal was to later train the model on actual code execution.

### 3. Edu scoring
We scored notebooks based on educational quality. We saw that using the whole notebook was not optimal, as many contained trivial or broken code.  

> This is similar to the insight from the [*BeyondWeb* paper](https://huggingface.co/papers/2508.10975), which showed that using high-quality data is better for synthetic data generation — a step we relied on for QA generation.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is similar to the insight from the [*BeyondWeb* paper](https://huggingface.co/papers/2508.10975), which showed that using high-quality data is better for synthetic data generation — a step we relied on for QA (Question-Answer) generation.  
```

You can explore the live leaderboard here: [huggingface.co/spaces/adyen/DABstep](https://huggingface.co/spaces/adyen/DABstep).

---

## 🎯 Our Objective

We set out to **train a small data agent model** that could perform better on DABStep.  

Our first choice was **Qwen-4B**: extremely small (fast to iterate with, easy to run), yet strong enough to act in agentic scenarios.  

Baseline results:  
- *Easy tasks:* **26.6%**  
- *Hard tasks:* **0%**  

Not great — but a promising starting point, since it left a lot of room for improvement.  

---

## 🔧 Primer on Scaffolding

DABStep uses [smolagents](https://github.com/huggingface/smolagents) to execute code. Smolagents comes with predefined behaviors, prompting structures, and expected formats.  

We also studied the **Qwen-Agent** codebase, where the authors recommend tailoring scaffolding to the model. This makes sense: Claude Code, for example, works shockingly well with Claude Sonnet because their scaffolding is aligned.  

So, we restructured our scaffolding:  
- Stripped it down to ~200 lines of code.  
- No external dependencies.  
- Inspired by the spirit of [**tiny-agents**](https://huggingface.co/blog/tiny-agents).  

> 👉 Check it out here: [utils.py](https://huggingface.co/spaces/lvwerra/jupyter-agent-2/blob/main/utils.py).

Author: We are not planning to add eval code. We scrapped Dabstep for our eval, as we want to quickly evaluate the model. However, the eval is actually a hub space, so people can simply go there for the eval https://huggingface.co/spaces/adyen/DABstep

**Results:** accuracy jumped from **26.6% → 66% (easy split)**. 🚀  

**Our loop:**  
- While loop with two tools: *code execution* and *final_answer*.  
- We differ from Qwen-Agent by explicitly adding a **final_answer** tool — which improved performance.  

Interestingly, this trend also shows up on the [Gaia benchmark](https://h2o.ai/blog/2024/h2o-ai-tops-gaia-leaderboard/): top models succeed with minimal scaffolding. This is the bitter lesson at play here, showing that moving complexity into the model is the way to go instead of doing handcrafted scaffolding heuristics that quickly become obsolete with each new model release.

## ⚙️ Training Pipeline

With simplified scaffolding in place, we focused on fine-tuning Qwen-4B for **data science agentic tasks**.  

**Datasets:**  
- **Kaggle Notebooks dataset**: ~2TB of notebooks.  
- Rich metadata for each notebook (authors, datasets used, etc.).  

## ⚙️ Processing Pipeline

We designed a multi-stage pipeline using [Datatrove](https://github.com/huggingface/datatrove) to clean and prepare Kaggle notebooks at scale.  

<img src="assets/jupyter-agent-2/jupyter-agent-dataset-pipeline.png" alt="Jupyter Agent Dataset Pipeline"/>

> Here’s how each step worked:

Author: Yeah, that should not be a problem. The code is here. https://github.com/huggingface/data-agent/pull/9 and in the release more or less each step is self contained into a file

### 1. Large-scale deduplication
We started with ~2TB of Kaggle notebooks and reduced it to ~250GB reusing our work from the BigScience project.  
Most Kaggle notebooks are small variations or near-identical copies, so this step was essential.  
*Key insight:* ~90% of raw notebooks are duplicates, which would have skewed training if left unfiltered.

### 2. Downloading linked datasets
Notebooks usually reference external datasets through Kaggle metadata.  
We built a pipeline to automatically fetch these datasets, ensuring the code inside notebooks could actually run. The goal was to later train the model on actual code execution.

### 3. Edu scoring

> We scored notebooks based on educational quality using Qwen-32B. We saw that using the whole notebook was not optimal, as many contained trivial or broken code.  

Author: > i think it would be cool to link the code for each step if they are easily separable
Same as before, i think we can add code with link to prompt otherwise it could be too crowded with all the prompts probably

  - Used `assistant_loss_only=True` → small performance boost.
  - Added netfune noise for full-parameter multi-epoch training → avoids overfitting.  

**Challenges:**  
- Prompting models for tool calling is tricky: not all prompts deliver the same performance ([Qwen docs](https://qwen.readthedocs.io/en/latest/framework/function_call.html#vllm)).  
- We had to manually test each one to find what worked best.  
- There’s no standardization in response formats for tool calling, making it difficult to switch between models.  
- Native Qwen's generation prompt is not adapted to `assistant_loss_only=True` training mode in TRL which requires to have generation tokens by default. Thus, we adapt the original chat templates by wrapping the assistant response part in the generation tags.
- Training thinking models on short reasoning texts may disrupt model capabilities → full-parameter training works better comparing to PEFT in this case. 

## 📊 Results

First, we generated dataset using Qwen-3-32B which contains long reasoning traces. We started with training a smaller Qwen-3-4B using PEFT:

**Qwen-3-4B**
- **Easy accuracy:** 72% (baseline: 26.6%)  

> - **Hard accuracy:** 5% (baseline: 0%)  

Author: I would stick with the results from the dataset release. Those were my previous results but make more sense to release indeed one family of results

---
title: "Jupyter Agents: training LLMs to reason with notebooks"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/jupyter-agent-2/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: baptistecolle
- user: hannayukhymenko
- user: lvwerra
---

# Jupyter Agents: training LLMs to reason with notebooks

The goal of our **Jupyter Agent** is to act as an agent that can execute code directly inside a Jupyter notebook and use this environment to solve data analysis and data science tasks. Think of it like *Cursor*, but living natively inside your data science workflow.  
We built a [demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/lvwerra/jupyter-agent-2) of this vision with **Qwen-3 Coder**, currently one of the strongest coding models. This is a follow-up to our earlier work on [jupyter-agent (v1)](https://huggingface.co/spaces/lvwerra/jupyter-agent).

While large models are starting to show useful behavior, the key question is how we can continue improving them. To this end, we focus on strengthening smaller models to perform well on agentic data science tasks as they currently struggle to compete with the large models.

> The goal of this project is to build a pipeline that first generates high-quality training data, then fine-tunes an existing small model, and finally evaluates whether its performance improves on suitable benchmarks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this project is to build a pipeline to first generate high-quality training data, then fine-tune an existing small model, and finally evaluate whether the model's performance improves on relevant benchmarks.
```

Let’s begin with the last step: selecting a strong benchmark for evaluating models on data science tasks.

## 🏁 Primer: the DABStep Benchmark

In order to understand if we are making progress towards better data science agents we need a benchmark to measure such capabilities. Last year, in partnership with Adyen, we introduced the **DABStep benchmark**: a way to evaluate data science agents on realistic tasks. The setup is simple: provide the LLM with datasets and ask it to answer non-trivial data questions.  

Example tasks:

| Question | Answer |
|----------|---------|
| Which card scheme had the highest average fraud rate in 2023? | SwiftCharge |
| For the year 2023, focusing on the merchant *Crossfit Hanna*, if we incentivize users to switch to a different Authorization Characteristics Indicator, which option would be the most cost-effective? | E:346.49 |

This benchmark remains challenging for today’s LLMs — e.g. the best out-of-the-box model is Claude 4 Sonnet which reaches not even 20% accuracy on the hard tasks.  
You can explore the live leaderboard [here] (https://huggingface.co/spaces/adyen/DABstep).

> ## 🎯 Our Objective

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 🎯 First Baseline
```

Now that we identified a good benchmark we can try to climb it! We set out to build a dataset for fine-tuning such that  even **a small data agent model** could perform well on DABStep.  

> Our first choice was [**Qwen3-4B**](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-4B-Thinking-2507): extremely small (fast to iterate with, easy to run), yet strong enough to act in agentic scenarios.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our first choice was [**Qwen3-4B-Thinking-2507**](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-4B-Thinking-2507): extremely small (fast to iterate with, easy to run), yet strong enough to act in agentic scenarios.  
```

Baseline results:  
- *Easy tasks:* **44.4%**  
- *Hard tasks:* **2.1%**  

> Not great — but a promising starting point, since it left a lot of room for improvement.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not great — but a promising starting point, since it left a lot of room for improvement. Let's see how we can improve it!
```

## 🔧 Primer on Scaffolding

A core aspect of agents that sets it apart from a pure chat model is the scaffolding built around the model to steer its behaviour. The evaluation script in DABStep for example uses [smolagents](https://github.com/huggingface/smolagents) to execute code. Smolagents comes with predefined behaviors, prompting structures, and expected formats.  

We also studied the [**Qwen-Agent**](https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen-Agent) codebase, where the authors tailoring scaffolding to the model. This makes sense: Claude Code, for example, works shockingly well with Claude Sonnet because their scaffolding is aligned.  

So, we restructured our scaffolding:  
- Stripped it down to ~200 lines of code.  
- No external dependencies.  
- Inspired by the spirit of [**tiny-agents**](https://huggingface.co/blog/tiny-agents).  

👉 Check it out here: [utils.py](https://huggingface.co/spaces/lvwerra/jupyter-agent-2/blob/main/utils.py).

**Results:** accuracy jumped from **44.4% → 59.7% (easy split)**. 🚀  

**Our loop:**  
- While loop with two tools: *code execution* to run the code and *final_answer* to return the final answer.  

> - We differ from Qwen-Agent by explicitly adding a **final_answer** tool — which in our testing has improved performance.  

Reviewer: Maybe we can also mention how we differ from smolagent? I think it uses the ReAct prompting?

## ⚙️ Training Pipeline

With simplified scaffolding in place, we focused on fine-tuning Qwen3-4B for **data science agentic tasks**.  

**Datasets:**  
- **Kaggle Notebooks dataset**: ~2TB of notebooks.
- **Kaggle Datasets**: 5TB of kaggle datasets that we manually downloaded and linked to the notebooks.

> - Rich metadata for each notebook (authors, datasets used, etc.).  

Reviewer: Let's move this to the Dataset Pipeline section? We can add a sentence to introduce this a bit:

```
The recipe to improve a model on a certain task or behaviour is to train it on data that reflects the tasks as closely as possible. A natural starting point is to look at real Jupyter Notebooks and find notebooks that align closely with the task that we plan to tackle, namely data analysis. 

Kaggle notebooks offer a wealth of high quality data analysis notebooks and are made available by Kaggle:

[DATASET STATS FROM ABOVE]
```

## ⚙️ Dataset Pipeline

> Now that we have good results with a base model it's time to build a dataset that will help us improve it even further. We designed a multi-stage pipeline using [Datatrove](https://github.com/huggingface/datatrove) to clean and prepare Kaggle notebooks at scale.  

Reviewer: If you apply my comment above and move the Kaggle intro to this section you will need to change this intro a bit, or just delete the first sentence.

<img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/jupyter-agent-2/jupyter-agent-dataset-pipeline.png" alt="Jupyter Agent Dataset Pipeline"/>

Here’s how each step worked:

### 1. Large-scale deduplication
We started with ~2TB of Kaggle notebooks and reduced it to ~250GB reusing our work from the BigCode project. As part of the StarCoder2 training data processing the notebooks (without output cells) were already deduplicated.
Most Kaggle notebooks are small variations or near-identical copies, so this step was essential.  
*Key insight:* ~90% of raw notebooks are duplicates, which would have skewed training if left unfiltered.

### 2. Downloading linked datasets
Notebooks usually reference external datasets through Kaggle metadata.  

> We built a pipeline to automatically fetch these datasets, ensuring the code inside notebooks could actually run. The goal was to later train the model on actual code execution.

Reviewer: Maybe add a little bit of info here about how you downloaded the data, how many datasets you downloaded, their volume? The section feels a bit like you stopped after the intro sentence :)

### 3. Edu scoring

> We scored notebooks based on educational quality using [Qwen3-32B](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-32B). We saw that using the whole notebook was not optimal, as many contained trivial or broken code. Our educational scoring approach is detailed in [`edu_scoring.py`](https://github.com/huggingface/jupyter-agent/blob/main/data/pipelines/edu_scoring.py).

Reviewer: you could still add a tldr of the approach in 1-2 sentences: e.g. "We scored each notebook from 1-5 and kept the notebooks with >XXX scores."

This is similar to the insight from the [*BeyondWeb* paper](https://huggingface.co/papers/2508.10975), which showed that using high-quality data is better for synthetic data generation — a step we relied on for QA (Question-Answer) generation.  
This helped the model learn from "high quality" notebooks instead of noisy ones.

> ### 4. Filtering irrelevant notebooks

Reviewer: a general comment for the filtering sections (edu +filtering): maybe mention how much data was removed in each section (like in the dedup one).

> We excluded notebooks about training LLMs or unrelated to data analysis.  

Reviewer: This could also do with 1-2 sentences of how you actually did it :) "We prompted Qwen to remove notebooks that XXX"

This ensured we trained only on relevant data science tasks.

### 5. QA generation
Using the cleaned notebooks, we generated question–answer pairs using [Qwen3-32B](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-32B). The questions and answer are grounded in the real notebook traces so the QA pairs are based on real code execution results.
**Prompt design:** we asked the LLM to produce natural questions that could realistically be asked of the dataset, then validated whether the notebook provided a correct answer.  

*Challenge:* We had to try many prompts to get higher-difficulty questions because LLMs tended to generate trivial ones like "what is the size of the dataset".  
*Insight:* We broke this into two steps because LLMs tended to hallucinate answers:  
1. Generate the question and answer.  
2. Ask another LLM (with access to the notebook) to check whether the answer was correct. 

The complete prompting strategy and implementation is available in [`qa_generation.py`](https://github.com/huggingface/jupyter-agent/blob/main/data/pipelines/qa_generation.py).

### 6. Trace generation

> We wanted to generate clean traces as the processed notebooks are often not very open ended or verbose. However, we want our Jupyter Agent to get to the result efficiently. To generate cleaner notebook traces for training we generated traces synthetically.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally we want to generate clean code executions traces since even the original notebooks after processing are often open ended and verbose with lots of irrelevant parts. However, we want our Jupyter Agent to get to the result efficiently. To generate cleaner notebook traces for training we generated traces synthetically based on the original notebooks.  
```

**Note:** the generated final answer in the notebook may vary from the answer specified in the QA pair. This is caused by the fact that the agent model could use data preprocessing methods and steps different from the original Kaggle notebook and the synthetic question would not usually specify them. This discrepancy is normal and lays foundation for a new exciting research direction of how language models tend to treat data analysis and whether they do it differently from humans. For full transparency we keep both LLM-generated final answer and original answer from the real Kaggle notebook as a signal of model's performance. We encourage the community to try different dataset mixes to see how they can push performance even further.

### 7. Final curation
We truncated overly long outputs and filtered out trivial traces to prevent content length issues and keep only high-quality traces.  
We kept non-trivial, multi-turn traces aligned with DABStep-style tasks.  

> The resulting [Jupyter Agent Dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/data-agents/jupyter-agent-dataset) became the foundation for SFT on Qwen3-4B models with 51k synthetic notebooks and almost 0.2B/200M tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting [Jupyter Agent Dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/data-agents/jupyter-agent-dataset) became the foundation for SFT on Qwen3-4B models with 51k synthetic notebooks and almost 0.2B tokens.
```

I would pick one or the other, both is a bit confusing

> The resulting [Jupyter Agent Dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/data-agents/jupyter-agent-dataset) became the foundation for SFT on Qwen3-4B models with 51k synthetic notebooks and almost 0.2B/200M tokens.

Reviewer: Make a transition to the next section: Now it's time to check if this dataset helps improve the model's ability to solve data analysis questions!

**Challenges:**  
- Prompting models for tool calling is tricky: not all prompts deliver the same performance ([Qwen docs](https://qwen.readthedocs.io/en/latest/framework/function_call.html#vllm)).  

> - We had to manually test each one to find what worked best.  

Reviewer: Skip this? I think the previous paragraph is a good conclusion and those challenges seem a bit generic.

from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer

model_name = "data-agents/jupyter-agent-qwen3-4b-instruct"

# load the tokenizer and the model
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_name)
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    model_name,
    torch_dtype="auto",
    device_map="auto"
)

# prepare the model input
prompt = "Give me a short introduction to large language model."
messages = [
    {"role": "user", "content": prompt}
]
text = tokenizer.apply_chat_template(
    messages,
    tokenize=False,
    add_generation_prompt=True,
)
model_inputs = tokenizer([text], return_tensors="pt").to(model.device)

# conduct text completion
generated_ids = model.generate(
    **model_inputs,
    max_new_tokens=16384
)
output_ids = generated_ids[0][len(model_inputs.input_ids[0]):].tolist() 

content = tokenizer.decode(output_ids, skip_special_tokens=True)

print("content:", content)
```

For Thinking model you can decode both thinking response and content using the next code:

```python
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer

model_name = "data-agents/jupyter-agent-qwen3-4b-thinking"

# ...use same processing code from above...
try:

>     # rindex finding 151668 (</think>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # index finding 151668 (</think>)
```
